# CHAPTER 11 Specifying and Validating Memory Consistency Models and Cache Coherence

By now we have hopefully convinced you that consistency models and cache coherence protocols are complex and subtle. In this chapter we discuss methods for rigorously specifying consistency models and coherence protocols and exploring their allowed behaviors. We also discuss methods for specifying their implementations and validating their correctness.

We start by briefly overviewing two methods for specifying concurrent systems—operational and axiomatic—focusing on how these methods can be used to specify consistency models and coherence protocols (Section 11.1). Given a formal consistency specification, we discuss how its behaviors can be explored automatically (Section 11.2). Finally, we will provide a whistle-stop tour of validating implementations, covering both formal and testing-based methods (Section 11.3).

## 11.1 SPECIFICATION

A **specification** serves as a contract between the user of the system and its implementer by defining precisely the set of legal behaviors of the system. A specification answers the question: *What are the allowed behaviors of the system?* In contrast, an **implementation** answers the question: *How does the system enforce the prescribed behaviors?*

What do we mean by *behavior*? A system interacts with its user (or environment) through a set of actions: (1) **input actions**: actions from the user to the system; (2) **internal actions**: those that happen within the system; and (3) **output actions**: actions from the system to the user. Among these only the input and the output actions are observable to the user—the internal actions are not. Thus, a sequence of (observable) input and output actions defines the **behavior** of the system.

Of interest are two classes of behavioral properties: **safety** and **liveness**.

A safety property asserts that *bad things should not happen*—i.e., it specifies what sequences of observable actions are legal. For concurrent systems there are usually multiple legal sequences because of non-determinism. Safety is not enough to fully specify a system, however. Consider a system which accepts an input action and simply halts; although it has not exhibited anything bad, such a system is clearly not useful. That is why specifications also include liveness, which asserts that *good things must eventually happen*.

Before we explain how behaviors can be formally specified, let us consider what the observable actions are for consistency models and coherence protocols.

**Consistency models: Observable actions and behavior**  
A memory consistency model is a contract between the software (user) and the hardware (implementer). Given a multithreaded program containing per-thread sequences of loads and stores, the memory model specifies what value each load must return. Thus, the relevant input actions are loads and stores (and their associated parameters including the processor core ID, address, and value to be stored in case of a store). The output actions are the values returned in response to the loads. A sequence of these observable actions (stores, loads, and the values returned) represents the behavior of a memory consistency model.

**Coherence protocols: Observable actions and behavior**  
Recall that the processor core pipeline interacts with the coherence protocol to jointly enforce the desired memory consistency model. Thus, the “user” of the coherence protocol is the pipeline that interacts with it via two input actions: (1) **read-request** for every load in the program; and (2) **write-request** for every store in the program. The output actions from the coherence protocol are: (1) **read-return** that returns a value for every read-request; and (2) **write-return** that is simply an acknowledgment for the write. (The pipeline must know when a write completes.) A sequence of these observable actions represents the externally observable behavior of a coherence protocol.

It is important to note here the difference between what is observable in a coherence protocol vs. a consistency model. In the former, the instant when a read-request or write-request returns is observable. However, for a consistency model, the instant when a load or store returns is not observable—only the values returned for loads are observable.

Next, we discuss two major ways to specify the behavior of a system: **operational** and **axiomatic**. In the former, the system is described using an abstract reference implementation, whereas in the latter, mathematical axioms are used to describe the system’s behaviors.

### 11.1.1 OPERATIONAL SPECIFICATION

An **operational specification** describes the behavior of a system using a reference implementation, typically expressed in the form of a state machine. The behaviors—i.e., the sequence of input/output actions—exhibited by the reference implementation define the set of all legal behaviors of the system. Operational models typically use internal states and internal actions to constrain the behavior of the system, thereby ensuring safety. Liveness in operational models hinges on the fact that state changes must eventually happen. Typically, liveness is expressed externally (outside of the state machine specification) using mathematical axioms written in temporal logic [31].

#### Specifying consistency models and coherence protocols operationally

Consistency models can be specified operationally using abstract implementations. Like their realistic counterparts, the abstract implementations typically have both the processor core pipeline component and the memory system component. Recall that the memory system component, which has the same interface as that of the coherence protocol (i.e., the same set of observable actions: read-request, read-return, write-request, write-return), specifies the coherence protocol.

In the following, we will describe two operational models for sequential consistency (SC). Both models have identical pipeline components but differ in their memory system components—the former specifies a consistency-agnostic coherence protocol whereas the latter specifies a consistency-directed coherence protocol. This will allow us to operationally characterize the differences between the two.

**SC Operational Spec1: In-order pipeline + atomic memory**  
An example of an operational SC specification is similar to the naive SC implementation described in Chapter 3.6 (the switch). In addition to the observable actions—stores, loads and the values returned—the model employs internal state (memory) to constrain the values that can be read by the loads.

The operational specification works as follows. (It is assumed that each core has a program counter, pointing to the next instruction to be fetched.)

1. **Step 1: Fetch.** One of the processor cores is non-deterministically selected; it fetches its next instruction and inserts it into a local instruction queue.
2. **Step 2: Issue from the pipeline.** Again one core is non-deterministically selected; it decodes the next instruction from its instruction queue. If it is a memory instruction, the pipeline issues a read-request (for a load) or a write-request (for a store) and blocks.
3. **Step 3: Atomic memory system.** Upon receiving a read-request, it reads the location from memory and responds with the value; upon receiving a write-request, the memory system writes it to memory and responds with an ack.
4. **Step 4: Return to the pipeline.** The pipeline unblocks upon receiving a response: ack (in case of a store) or value (in case of a load).

The behaviors produced by this specification are sequences of input actions in program order (load/store at Step 1) and output actions (value returned for a load at Step 4). It is easy to see that its behaviors satisfy SC. For example, in the message passing example in Table 11.1 the following sequence is observable:

`«S1, S2, L1:r1=SET, L2:r2=NEW»`

Likewise, several other sequences in which L1 repeats one or more times until it sees a value of SET are possible. But the following SC violation is not observable:

`«S1, S2, L1:r1=SET, L2:r2=0»`

**Table 11.1: Message passing example**

| Core C1 | Core C2 | Comments |
|---------|---------|----------|
| S1: St data = NEW; | L1: Ld r1 = flag; | Initially data and flag are 0. |
| S2: St flag = SET; | B1: if(r1 ≠ SET) goto L1; | L1, B1 may repeat many times. |
| | L2: Ld r2 = data; | |

**SC Operational Spec2: In-order pipeline + buffered memory**  
Now let us consider another SC operational model in which the atomic memory is now front-ended by a global FIFO store queue to form a buffered memory system. Each entry in the store queue contains the address, the value to be stored, and the ID of the core that issued the write request. The buffered memory system responds to a write request with two types of acks: an **ack** to denote that the request has been inserted into the write queue and another **late-ack** when the write has been written to memory. More specifically, the buffered memory system works as follows. (Steps 1 and 4 are identical to the previous spec and hence omitted.)

- **Step 2’:** Issue from the pipeline. One core is non-deterministically selected; it decodes the next instruction from its instruction queue. If it is a store instruction, the pipeline issues a write-request and blocks; if it is a load instruction, the pipeline waits for the latest write to be late-acked, then issues a read-request and blocks.
- **Step 3’:** Buffered memory system. Upon receiving a write-request, the buffered memory system inserts it into the global store queue and responds to the pipeline with an ack. (When the write eventually gets written to memory, a late-ack is sent to the processor core that initiated the write.) Upon receiving a read-request, the value is read from memory and returned to the pipeline.

Despite the buffering, the behavior produced by the model satisfies SC. Returning to the example shown in Table 11.1:

`«S1, S2, L1:r1=SET, L2:r2=0»`

The above SC violation is **not** observable because the global store queue is a FIFO and hence commits stores to memory without violating per-core program order.

#### Consistency-agnostic vs. Consistency-directed coherence

Recall that in Chapter 2 we classified coherence interfaces into two categories: consistency-agnostic and consistency-directed. The atomic memory system (Step 3 from Spec1) specifies a consistency-agnostic protocol since writes happen synchronously—whereas the buffered memory system (Step 3’) is one example of a consistency-directed protocol specification since writes are asynchronous. (More aggressive specifications of the latter are possible [3].) Although both of these specifications combine with an in-order pipeline to enforce SC, the two protocols show different behaviors. Consider the sequence of externally observable actions shown in Table 11.2.

`«write-request(X,1), write-return(X,1), read-request(X), read-return(X,0)»`

**Table 11.2: Linearizability vs. SC: whereas SC allows for the read to return a 0, linearizability does not.**

| Time | Core C1 | Core C2 |
|------|---------|---------|
| t0 | Write-request (X,1) | |
| t1 | Write-return (X,1)→ok | |
| t2 | | Read-request (X) |
| t3 | | Read-return (X)→0 |

The above sequence cannot be observed in an atomic memory system although the sequence does not violate SC. This is because the atomic memory specification ensures that the write is actually written to memory between its invocation (t0) and response (t1), ensuring that the read will return a 1 and not a 0. However, the buffered memory specification allows this behavior because the write to X can be buffered in the global queue when the read happens, allowing the read to see a 0.

The atomic memory system (or consistency-agnostic coherence) can be modeled using a correctness condition that is stronger than SC called **linearizability** [16]. In addition to the SC rules, linearizability requires that a write must take effect *in real time* between its invocation and response. Linearizability is a composable property: an object is linearizable iff its components are linearizable. Translating to our setting, a memory system is linearizable iff each of its locations are individually linearizable. Thus, consistency-agnostic coherence can be specified on a per-memory location basis, i.e., per-memory location linearizability. This also explains why coherence of individual locations can be enforced independently using, for example, distributed directories.

In contrast, SC is not a composable property. Even if all memory locations satisfy SC independently (and the pipeline does not reorder memory operations), it does not imply that the whole system is SC. Recall that in Chapter 2 (sidebar) we looked at consistency-like definitions of coherence, where coherence was defined as SC on a per-memory location basis. Such a definition of coherence, however, does not completely specify a coherence protocol. (Because linearizability is stronger than SC, per-location SC is not strong enough to specify consistency-agnostic coherence. Because SC is not compositional, per-location SC is not strong enough to specify consistency-directed coherence as well.) Nevertheless, **per-memory location SC** is a useful safety check for coherence. Any consistency-agnostic protocol—recall that it satisfies per-memory location linearizability—will necessarily satisfy per-memory location SC. Even for a consistency-directed coherence protocol, per-location SC is a useful safety check since most consistency models explicitly mandate SC on a per-location basis (and call it the “coherence” axiom! [4]).

In summary, whereas consistency-agnostic coherence exposes an atomic (linearizable) memory interface, consistency-directed coherence exposes an interface of the target consistency model.

#### Specifying implementations operationally

Until now, we saw how consistency models and coherence protocols can be specified operationally. One of the benefits of the operational method is that lower level implementations (e.g., detailed coherence protocols) can be modeled naturally by refining the base specification with implementation-specific internal states and actions.

For example, let us add caches to the SC operational specification (Spec1) described above, with each processor now holding a local cache and its associated coherence controller. Each read/write request from the pipeline is now sent first to the local cache controller that checks for a hit or a miss. If it is a miss, the cache controller contacts the directory/memory controller with a GetS or GetM request (as we saw in the earlier chapters on coherence protocols). The exact state transitions naturally depend on the specifics of the coherence protocol employed, but the takeaway here is that the coherence protocols discussed earlier in table format are essentially operational models obtained by refining the memory system (Step 3 or Step 3’). In a similar vein, it is possible to refine the pipeline specification to model additional pipeline stages to faithfully model the pipeline implementation.

#### Tool support

Operational models can be directly expressed in any language for expressing state machines such as Murphi (http://mclab.di.uniroma1.it/site/index.php/software/18-cmurphi) or TLA (https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tla.html). In particular, each of the coherence protocol tables in the book are easily expressed as state machines.

### 11.1.2 AXIOMATIC SPECIFICATION

**Axiomatic specification** is a more abstract way of specifying the behavior of a concurrent system, whereby mathematical axioms composed of observable actions (and relations between these actions) are used to constrain the set of allowed behaviors.

#### Specifying consistency models axiomatically

The formalism we used to describe the SC, TSO, and XC memory models in the earlier chapters corresponds to the axiomatic method. Recall that the formalism is composed of the following components.

- **Observable actions:** These are the loads, stores and the values returned for the loads.
- **Relations:** The **program order** relation is defined as the per-core total order representing the order in which loads and stores appear in each core. The **global memory order** is defined as a total order on the memory operations from all cores.
- **Axioms:** There are two categories of axioms—safety and liveness—that specify the safety and liveness properties, respectively. For SC there are three safety axioms: (1) **preserved program order** axiom—the global memory order respects program order of each core; (2) **load value** axiom—the load gets the value written by the most recent store before it in global memory order; and (3) the **atomicity** axiom—the load and store of an RMW instruction occur consecutively in global memory order. In addition to these safety axioms, there is also a liveness axiom that states that no memory operations must be preceded by an infinite sequence of other memory operations; informally, this means that a memory operation must eventually perform and cannot be delayed indefinitely.

For any sequence of observable actions—if we are able to construct a global memory order that adheres to the above axioms, then it is said to be a legal behavior of the memory model.

#### Specifying coherence protocols axiomatically

We saw earlier how coherence protocols can be specified operationally. Here, we see how they can be specified at a more abstract level axiomatically, which can be useful for verification purposes. Specifically, we focus on specifying a consistency-agnostic coherence protocol that satisfies linearizability. (Consistency-directed coherence protocols can be specified similarly to how consistency models are specified axiomatically.) Recall that linearizability is stronger than SC, e.g., it disallows the sequence of actions shown in Table 11.2. Therefore, the specification adds an additional axiom over and above SC to constrain such behavior.

- **Observable actions:** Because we are specifying a coherence protocol, the relevant actions are the read-request, read-return, write-request, and write-return events (the coherence protocol interface as seen by the processor pipeline).
- **Internal action:** In addition to the observable actions, we add two internal actions—**read-perform** and **write-perform**—the instants in which a read or a write takes effect.
- **Relations:** Like SC, the global memory order is defined to be a total order on the read-perform and write-perform events from all cores.
- **Axioms:** In addition to the three safety axioms that are associated with SC there is a **fourth axiom** that says that a read or write must perform between its invocation and response; more formally, a write-perform (read-perform) action must appear in between the write-request (read-request) and write-return (read-return) actions in the global memory order. Finally, like in SC there is a liveness axiom that says that any read or write request must eventually return.

#### Specifying implementations axiomatically

We saw earlier how implementations (e.g., coherence protocol implementations) can be naturally expressed operationally by extending the base operational specification with internal states and actions. In a similar vein, implementations can also be expressed axiomatically by extending the base axiomatic specification. In this section, we focus on how a processor core pipeline can be specified axiomatically following Lustig et al. [20].

Recall the abstract nature of the axiomatic specification, where a load/store is modeled as a single instantaneous action. Our goal now is different though. It is not to specify correctness—rather, the goal is to faithfully model a realistic processor core in which each load or store goes through several pipeline stages. Therefore, a single load or store action is now expanded into multiple internal pipeline **sub-actions** with each sub-action representing a pipeline stage.

For example, let us consider the classic five-stage pipeline. Here, a load is split into five sub-actions: fetch, decode, execute, memory, and writeback. A store is split into seven actions: fetch, decode, execute, memory, writeback, exit-store-buffer and memory-write. (“Memory” refers to the memory stage in the pipeline, whereas “memory-write” refers to the sub-action in which the value is actually written to memory.)

Recall that a key component of the axiomatic consistency specification is the **preserved program order (ppo)** axiom, that mandates that program order must be preserved in the global memory order. Analogous to ppo, the idea is to use **pipeline ordering axioms** for specifying *microarchitectural happens-before*—i.e., specifying whether or not the pipeline preserves the ordering between sub-actions of different instructions. Again, it is important to understand the subtle difference between ppo and the pipeline ordering axioms. Whereas the goal of the former is to specify correctness, the goal with the latter is to faithfully model the pipeline. In fact, whether or not the pipeline implementation honors the ppo axioms (for the intended consistency model) is an important validation question, which we address in the next section.

For the five-stage pipeline the pipeline ordering axioms are as follows.

- **Fetch honors program order.** If instruction i1 occurs before i2 in program order (po), then the fetch of i1 happens before i2. That is: `i1 po→ i2 ⇒ i1:fetch → i2:fetch`
- **Decode is in order.** If fetch of i1 happens before i2, then decode of i1 happens before i2. That is: `i1:fetch → i2:fetch ⇒ i1:decode → i2:decode`
- In a similar vein, execute, memory and writeback stages preserve ordering (elided).
- **FIFO store buffer.** If writeback of store i1 happens before that of store i2, then i1 exits the store buffer before i2. That is: `i1:writeback → i2:writeback ⇒ i1:exits-store-buffer → i2:exits-store-buffer`
- **Ordered writes.** If i1 exits the store buffer before i2, then i1 writes to memory before i2. That is: `i1:exits-store-buffer → i2:exits-store-buffer ⇒ i1:memory-write → i2:memory-write`

Finally, the load value axiom specifies the constraints under which a load can read the value from a store of the same address.

- **Load value axiom.** If a store i1 writes to memory before load i2’s memory stage (and there are no other memory writes in the middle from other stores), then i2 reads the value written by i1.

Any sequence of pipeline actions (and load values returned) that adhere to the above axioms are legal behaviors. In order to understand this better, consider the message passing example shown in Table 11.3. When L1 sees the new value SET, can L2 see the old value 0? The five-stage pipeline would permit this behavior if a global sequence of pipeline actions can be constructed that satisfies the axioms above. If not—i.e., if the constraints lead to a cycle, the behavior is not permitted. Let us attempt to construct a global sequence.

- `S1:memory-write → S2:memory-write` (the pipeline ordering axioms ensure that S1 writes to memory before S2).
- `S2:memory-write → L1:memory` (S2 has to be written to memory before L1’s memory stage—only then, will L1 be able to read from S2).
- `L1:memory → L2:memory` (the pipeline ordering axioms ensure that L1 performs its memory stage before L2).
- `L2:memory → S1:memory-write` (if L2 must read the old value, and not the one produced by S1, its memory stage must have happened before S1’s memory write).

**Table 11.3: Message passing example**

| Core C1 | Core C2 | Comments |
|---------|---------|----------|
| S1: St data = NEW; | L1: Ld r1 = flag; | L1 reads SET |
| S2: St flag = SET; | L2: Ld r2 = data; | Can L2 read initial value 0? |

As we can see, the constraints listed above are impossible to satisfy as it results in a cycle. Thus, the five-stage pipeline does not permit this behavior for this example.

In the above discussion, we had not modeled caches or cache coherence explicitly. Manerkar et al. [24] show how the axiomatic specification of the pipeline can be extended to model the coherence protocol/pipeline interactions.

In summary, we saw how pipeline implementations can be specified axiomatically. The primary benefit of modeling implementations is so that they can be validated. In Section 11.3.1 we will see how axiomatic models of the implementation can be validated against its consistency specifications.

#### Tool support

Specification languages such as Alloy (http://alloy.mit.edu) or **Cat**, associated with the Herd tool (http://diy.inria.fr/herd/), can be used to express axiomatic specifications of consistency models. The **µspec** domain specific language allows for pipeline and coherence protocol implementations to be specified axiomatically (http://check.cs.princeton.edu/#tools).

## 11.2 EXPLORING THE BEHAVIOR OF MEMORY CONSISTENCY MODELS

Because consistency models define shared memory behavior, it is crucial for programmers and middleware writers—e.g., compiler writers and kernel developers—to be able to understand what behaviors are permitted by the memory model and what behaviors are not. Typically, memory consistency models are specified by processor vendors in prose, which can often be ambiguous [1]. A formally specified memory consistency model is not only unambiguous, but also enables behaviors to be explored automatically. But before delving into how this exploration can be carried out, let us briefly discuss **litmus tests**—simple programs that reveal the properties of a memory model.

### 11.2.1 LITMUS TESTS

A memory consistency model is likely not very relevant to a high-level programmer who uses libraries for synchronization. It is, however, important for low-level programmers who develop synchronization constructs—be it a compiler writer who implements language level synchronization or a kernel writer who develops kernel level synchronization or an application programmer who develops lock-free data structures. Such low-level programmers will want to know the behaviors exhibited by the memory model so that they can get the desired behavior for their hand-crafted synchronization situation. **Litmus tests** are simple multithreaded code sequences that abstract synchronization situations; the behavior(s) exhibited by the memory model in these tests are thus instructive to the low-level programmer. For instance, they may reveal whether or not a particular FENCE is required to get the desired behavior. These litmus tests are also used in processor vendor manuals to explain the properties of the memory consistency model.

#### Examples

We used such litmus tests to explain the behavior of memory models in earlier chapters. Table 3.3 for instance is dubbed **Dekker’s litmus test** since it abstracts the synchronization situation in Dekker’s algorithm for mutual exclusion; Table 3.1 is often referred to as the **message passing test**. Consider another example shown in Table 11.4 which is referred to as the “coherence” litmus test. An execution that results in r1 reading the NEW value but r2 reading the old value of 0 violates the data-value invariant and hence violates the coherence litmus test.

**Table 11.4: Can r1 be NEW while r2 is 0?**

| Core C1 | Core C2 | Comments |
|---------|---------|----------|
| S1: x = NEW; | L1: r1 = x; | Initially x = 0 |
| | L2: r2 = x | |

### 11.2.2 EXPLORATION

Given a formal specification of a memory model and a litmus test, can we automatically explore all possible behaviors of the memory model for that litmus test? Fortunately, there are tools that do this. Intuitively, once a memory model is formalized—axiomatically or operationally—it is possible to exhaustively enumerate every possible schedule of the litmus test and, for each such execution, employ the mathematical axioms (in case of axiomatic) or execute the state machine (in case of operational) to determine the output of the execution (the values returned by loads).

#### Tool support

Recall that the **herd** tool provides a language to express consistency models mathematically; the tool also has a built-in simulator for exploring behaviors of litmus tests. The **ppcmem** tool (https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~pes20/ppcmem/help.html) does something similar but is specialized for POWER and ARM memory models, while the **CppMem** tool (http://svr-pes20-cppmem.cl.cam.ac.uk/cppmem/) is geared toward the C/C++ language-level memory model. As far as operational models are concerned, the **RMEM** tool (https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~sf502/regressions/rmem/) has built-in operational models for ARM (multiple variants), POWER (multiple variants), x86-TSO and RISC-V, and also allows for their behaviors to be explored.

**How to generate litmus tests?** They can of course be generated manually to test any interesting memory model feature or synchronization situation. There is also tool support. Litmus tests can be generated randomly via a test generator [14, 15]. The **diy** tool (http://diy.inria.fr/doc/gen.html) helps generate a litmus test given the shape of the test (the program order relations and the shared memory dependencies). Finally, **litmusttestgen** (https://github.com/nvlabs/litmustestgen) is a more automated method to generate a comprehensive set of litmus tests for a memory model specification expressed axiomatically.

While litmus tests are a good way to convey intuition about a memory model, they cannot normally serve as a complete specification of the memory model, since they leave some potential behaviors (those that are not covered in the tests) unspecified. But given a sufficient number of tests, and a syntactic template of the memory model (with missing pieces), **MemSynth** (http://memsynth.uwplse.org/) shows how a complete memory model satisfying the litmus tests can be synthesized.

## 11.3 VALIDATING IMPLEMENTATIONS

Memory consistency enforcement spans multiple sub-systems including the processor pipeline and the cache and memory sub-systems. All of these sub-systems must cooperate with each other to enforce the promised memory consistency model. Validating that they do so correctly is the topic of this section.

Exhaustively validating that the complete implementation satisfies the promised memory model is the end goal. But the sheer complexity of modern multiprocessors makes this a very hard problem. Therefore there is a gamut of validation techniques, ranging from formal verification to informal testing. This is a huge topic in itself and probably worthy of its own book. Here, we provide a flavor of some of these techniques with pointers for further study.

### 11.3.1 FORMAL METHODS

In this category, a formal model of an implementation is validated against a specification. We classify these methods based on whether the specification and the implementation are expressed axiomatically or operationally. We then explain each category by considering one or two examples of techniques belonging to that class. We conclude this section with some closing thoughts on operational vs. axiomatic methods.

#### Operational Implementation against Axiomatic Specification

**Manual proof**  
Given an implementation in the form of an operational model and the specification in the form of an axiomatic model, one can show via a manual proof that the implementation satisfies each of the axioms of the specification.

For example, consider a system in which the processor pipeline presents loads and stores in program order and a cache coherence protocol that ensures SWMR and data-value invariants. Meixner and Sorin [26] showed that such a system enforces SC by proving that it satisfies each of the SC axioms.

One powerful template [30] for coming up with a proof follows Lamport’s method for totally ordering the events of a distributed system [18]. The idea is to assign hypothetical timestamps for every independent action (e.g., a fetch of a store instruction at the pipeline) and derive timestamps of causally related events (e.g., a GetM request due to the store gets a higher timestamp). In doing so, a global order of all memory operations is derived. Then every value loaded is checked to determine whether it returns a value consistent with the load value axiom.

**Model checking**  
Operational specifications of coherence protocols are commonly verified against axiomatic invariants using **model checkers**. Model checkers, such as Murphi [12], allow for coherence protocols similar to those described in tabular format in the earlier chapters to be expressed in a domain specific language. The language also allows for axioms such as SWMR to be expressed. Then the model checker explores the entire state space of the protocol to either ensure that the invariants hold or report a counter example (a sequence of states that violates the invariant). However, such explicit-state model checking can only be carried out for limited models of the implementation (e.g., two or three addresses, values, and processors) because of state-space explosion.

There are a number of approaches for countering state-space explosion. **Symbolic model checkers** [7] use logic for manipulating sets of states (rather than single states), thereby enabling the scaling of the models. **Bounded model checkers** [6] compromise on exhaustiveness by only looking for counter examples of a limited length in the sequence of states. Finally, one approach for a complete proof is to model-check exhaustively for a limited system and then employ **parameterization** [11, 17] to generalize for an arbitrary number of processors, addresses etc.

The following is a concrete example of how a non-trivial coherence protocol can be model-checked using Murphi: https://github.com/icsa-caps/c3d-protocol

#### Operational Implementation against Operational Specification

Suppose there are two state machines: Q (the implementation) and S (the specification) with the same set of observable actions. How do we prove that Q implements S faithfully? In order to establish this, we need to prove that all of the behaviors—the sequences of observable actions—of Q are contained in S.

**Refinement**  
One stylized proof technique that allows one to reason about pairs of states in Q and S (rather than sequences) is called **refinement** [2] (also known as **simulation** [27]). The key idea is to identify an **abstraction function** F (also known as refinement mapping or simulation relation) that maps every reachable state of the implementation to that of the specification, such that:
- initial states (q0 ∈ Q; s0 ∈ S) are part of the mapping. That is, `F(q0) = s0`; and
- the abstraction function preserves state transitions. That is, for every state transition in the implementation between two states qi and qj with some observable action a, i.e., `qi —a→ qj`, the abstraction function will lead to two states in the specification with the same observable action, i.e., `F(qi) —a→ F(qj)`.

For example, consider a cache coherent system containing caches and global memory kept coherent using an MSI coherence protocol on an atomic bus (the implementation). Recall that the overall state of the implementation includes the states of all the caches (value and the MSI state for every location) as well as the state of the global memory. We can show that the cache coherent memory implements atomic memory (the specification) using refinement. To this end, we identify an abstraction function relating the state of cache coherent memory to the state of atomic memory. Specifically, the value of an atomic memory block for a given location is given by: (1) the value of the cache block for that location, if the block is in M state; (2) otherwise, it is identical to the values in each of the blocks that are in S state and the global memory. The proof would then look at all possible state transitions in the protocol to check whether the abstraction function holds. For example, consider the transition `S —Write(X,1)→ M` for some cache block X whose initial value is 0. For the cache block that goes into M state the abstraction function holds, as it will cache the up-to-date value of 1. For the other cache blocks that were in state S, the abstraction function holds provided the MSI protocol correctly enforces SWMR and invalidates all those blocks.

Thus, a refinement proof not only requires the identification of an abstraction function, it also requires subsequent reasoning about the state transitions in the implemented system; that process might reveal other invariants (e.g., SMWR revealed above) that need to be proven. The **Kami** framework [10] uses a refinement proof to show that an operational specification of a processor combined with a cache coherent memory system satisfies SC.

**Model checking**  
One way to show that an implementation satisfies the specification is to run the two state machines side by side with the same sequence of input actions, and observe whether they produce the same output actions. While this simple strategy is sound, it may not always succeed. (When the method says that the state machines are equivalent they are definitely equivalent—but when it says they are not equivalent, they may yet turn out to be equivalent.) This is because of the non-determinism inherent in concurrent systems—sometimes, the specification and the implementation may show identical behavior, but with different schedules. Having said this, this is quite a useful strategy, especially when the implementation and specification are conceptually similar. Banks et al. [5] employed this strategy to show that a cache coherence protocol satisfies the promised consistency model.

#### Axiomatic Implementation Against Axiomatic Specification

We saw how implementations (such as the core pipeline implementation) can be specified axiomatically. How to formally validate that such an axiomatic model satisfies the axiomatic specification of the consistency model?

The **Check** line of work [20, 21, 24] leverages the idea of exhaustive exploration for this purpose. Given a litmus test and an axiomatic specification of the memory model, we saw in Section 11.2 how all of the behaviors of the memory model on the litmus test can be exhaustively explored. Such an exhaustive exploration can be carried out for axiomatic specifications of implementations as well. The behaviors on the litmus test can then be compared against the behaviors on the abstract axiomatic model. If the implementation shows *more* behavior, it indicates a bug in the implementation. On the other hand, if the implementation shows *less* behavior than the specification, it indicates that the implementation is conservative. The same process is then repeated for other litmus tests that are part of the suite.

One limitation of the above approach is that the validation is exhaustive only for the litmus tests explored. A complete verification requires exploring all possible programs. **PipeProof** [22] accomplishes this with an induction style proof on a symbolic abstraction of a program which allows for programs of any number of instructions and all possible addresses and values to be modeled.

#### Summary: Operational vs. Axiomatic

Generally speaking, axiomatic specifications are declarative; they describe what behaviors are permitted without fully describing how the system is implemented. Typically, they are more abstract and more easily expressed in mathematics; thus, it is faster to explore their behaviors. On the other side of the coin, operational models are closer to implementations and more intuitive for an architect; thus, it is arguably easier to model detailed implementations operationally. Recall that we were able to naturally describe fairly complex coherence protocols in the earlier chapter in table format. In summary, whether to go down the axiomatic or operational route is not a question that has a simple answer.

Finally, it is important to understand that **hybrid** axiomatic/operational models are also possible. For example, let us consider a multiprocessor with caches kept coherent using a coherence protocol. Instead of describing the coherence protocol operationally, it is also possible to abstract it axiomatically using the SWMR and the data-value invariants. Such an approach might be attractive when breaking down a complex verification problem into simpler ones—for example, when verifying that the combination of the pipeline and the memory system correctly enforces the consistency model, it might make sense to verify the coherence protocol independently and then abstract it axiomatically via SMWR.

### 11.3.2 TESTING

Formally proving that the implementation satisfies the specification provides high confidence that the implementation is indeed correct. Yet, formal verification is not a panacea. The reasons are threefold. First, formal verification is hard to scale. Automatic techniques such as model checking may not be able to handle the humongous state spaces of complex implementations; on the other hand, techniques that can handle such large state spaces are not fully automated and are not easy for architects. Second, formally specifying an implementation correctly is not straightforward and may be error prone. Third, even if the model is accurate, it may be incomplete, in the sense that there might be parts of the implementation that the model does not consider. That is why testing the final implementation thoroughly is extremely important. We classify testing into two categories: **offline testing** and **online testing**. In the former (also known as static testing), a real or simulated multiprocessor is tested for consistency violations prior to being deployed. With the latter, violations are detected at runtime after deployment.

#### Offline Testing

The idea is to run test programs on a real (or simulated) machine, observe their behaviors, and validate them. The approach raises two questions: How are the test programs generated? How are their behaviors validated?

One of the earlier works on memory consistency testing, **TSOtool** [15], uses a pseudo-random generator to generate short test programs. Given a previously unseen randomly generated program, how to validate its observed behavior (values returned by reads)? This is the key challenge that TSOtool addresses. Intuitively, this demands a **consistency checker** that dynamically reconstructs a global order from the observations and checks whether the order is allowed by the consistency model. While reconstructing a global order from values returned by reads is an NP-complete problem, TSOtool comes up with a polynomial algorithm that trades off accuracy for performance (it might miss some violations). **MTraceCheck** [19] improves upon this checker further.

Instead of using randomly generated programs, one can use litmus tests (Section 11.2.1). With litmus tests, the advantage is that a suite of tests is already available for most memory models; moreover, for each litmus test the expected behavior is known, which obviates the need for a sophisticated checker that reconstructs the global memory order. The **litmus** tool **diy** (http://diy.inria.fr/doc/litmus.html) is a framework for testing real processors using this approach.

While litmus testing and random testing are effective in a post-silicon environment, they may not be that effective in a slow simulator environment. **McVersi** [14] proposes a genetic-programming-based approach that leverages the white-box nature of the simulator environment to come up with test programs that are likely to reveal consistency violations faster.

#### Online Testing

Offline testing is certainly beneficial but, because of the fundamental limitation of testing, it may fail to uncover some bugs. Furthermore, even if offline testing did not miss any bugs, hardware transient errors and fabrication errors may yet cause consistency violations in the wild. In **online testing** (also known as **dynamic testing**), hardware support is added to a multiprocessor for detecting such violations during execution. One conceptually straightforward way to do this is to implement a consistency checker as in TSOtool, but in hardware. However, a naive implementation of such a scheme would be impractically expensive in terms of memory (metadata) and communication overhead. Chen et al. [9] propose a scheme to reduce these costs significantly, leveraging the fact that not all memory operations need to be tracked (e.g., loads and stores to local variables need not be tracked). Meixner and Sorin [25] propose an alternative strategy that reduces the verification task into that of verifying two invariants: (a) checking that the cache coherence protocol correctly enforces SWMR; and (b) checking that the pipeline correctly interacts with the coherence protocol. Notably, they show that these two invariants can be efficiently checked in hardware.

## 11.4 HISTORY AND FURTHER READING

In the same paper that Lamport defined SC, he also provided (its first) operational specification. The specification is a variant of, and semantically equivalent to, our SC Operational Spec1 in Section 11.1.1. It is interesting to note that the very first operational specification of SC employed a linearizable memory system. (Herlihy and Wing [16] formalized linearizability a decade later.) The first operational specification of SC that used a consistency-directed (i.e., non-linearizable) coherence protocol was proposed by Afek et al. [3]. Shasha and Snir [34] were the first to provide an axiomatic specification of SC.

The 1990s and early 2000s saw significant research on formally verifying coherence protocols, not only against invariants such as SWMR but also against memory consistency models [32]. Park and Dill [29] showed how the protocol used in the FLASH multiprocessor protocol can be abstracted and verified using a theorem prover. Qadeer [33] showed that verifying against SC is undecidable, but can be made tractable for most practical protocols. Chatterjee et al. [8] showed how the pipeline combined with a coherence protocol can be automatically verified against an operational specification of a weak memory model in a model checker.

Because of the complexity of formally verifying coherence protocols—state space explosion combined with the complexity of parameterization—there have been efforts to design coherence protocols in a way that enables straightforward parameterized verification for an indefinite number of processors [37, 38]. Another promising direction is a **correct-by-construction** approach to coherence protocols. **TRANSIT** [36] and **verC3** [13] leverage program synthesis technology for auto-completing coherence protocols given a partial implementation. **ProtoGen** [28] proposes a method for automatically producing a complete and concurrent protocol (with transient states and actions) given an atomic protocol with only stable states and transitions.

In this chapter, we focused on methods for validating whether or not the microarchitecture specification (e.g., pipelines and coherence protocols) satisfies the architectural consistency specification. However, a complete validation requires spanning the stack from high-level languages, (through compilers, ISA, microarchitecture) to RTL. **TriCheck** [35] validates that the HLL, compiler, ISA, and microarchitecture satisfy the language-level consistency specification for a set of litmus tests. **RTLCheck** [23] validates that the RTL faithfully implements the microarchitectural consistency specification for a set of litmus tests.

To conclude, we must stress here that we have but scratched the surface on this topic that is, despite its long history, continuing to see exciting new results.

## 11.5 REFERENCES

[1] Linux Kernel mailing list: Spin unlock optimization. https://lists.gt.net/engine?post=105365;list=linux

[2] M. Abadi and L. Lamport. The existence of refinement mappings. *Theoretical Computer Science*, 82(2):253–284, 1991. DOI: 10.1109/lics.1988.5115

[3] Y. Afek, G. M. Brown, and M. Merritt. Lazy caching. *ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems*, 15(1):182–205, 1993. DOI: 10.1145/151646.151651

[4] J. Alglave, L. Maranget, and M. Tautschnig. Herding cats: Modelling, simulation, testing, and data mining for weak memory. *ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems*, 36(2):7:1–7:74, 2014. DOI: 10.1145/2627752

[5] C. J. Banks, M. Elver, R. Hoffmann, S. Sarkar, P. Jackson, and V. Nagarajan. Verification of a lazy cache coherence protocol against a weak memory model. In *Formal Methods in Computer Aided Design (FMCAD)*, pages 60–67, Vienna, Austria, October 2–6, 2017. DOI: 10.23919/fmcad.2017.8102242

[6] A. Biere, A. Cimatti, E. M. Clarke, and Y. Zhu. Symbolic model checking without BDDs. In *Tools and Algorithms for Construction and Analysis of Systems, 5th International Conference (TACAS)*, Held as Part of the Proc. of the European Joint Conferences on the Theory and Practice of Software (ETAPS), pages 193–207, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, March 22–28, 1999. DOI: 10.21236/ada360973

[7] J. R. Burch, E. M. Clarke, K. L. McMillan, and D. L. Dill. Sequential circuit verification using symbolic model checking. In *Proc. of the 27th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference*, pages 46–51, Orlando, FL, June 24–28, 1990. DOI: 10.1109/dac.1990.114827

[8] P. Chatterjee, H. Sivaraj, and G. Gopalakrishnan. Shared memory consistency protocol verification against weak memory models: Refinement via model-checking. In *Proc. Computer Aided Verification, 14th International Conference (CAV)*, pages 123–136, Copenhagen, Denmark, July 27–31, 2002. DOI: 10.1007/3-540-45657-0_10

[9] K. Chen, S. Malik, and P. Patra. Runtime validation of memory ordering using constraint graph checking. In *14th International Conference on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA-14)*, pages 415–426, Salt Lake City, UT, February 16–20, 2008. DOI: 10.1109/hpca.2008.4658657

[10] J. Choi, M. Vijayaraghavan, B. Sherman, A. Chlipala, and Arvind. Kami: A platform for high-level parametric hardware specification and its modular verification. *PACMPL*, 1(ICFP):24:1–24:30, 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3110268

[11] C. Chou, P. K. Mannava, and S. Park. A simple method for parameterized verification of cache coherence protocols. In *Proc. Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design, 5th International Conference (FMCAD)*, pages 382–398, Austin, TX, November 15–17, 2004. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-30494-4_27

[12] D. L. Dill. The Murphi verification system. In *Proc. Computer Aided Verification, 8th International Conference (CAV)*, pages 390–393, New Brunswick, NJ, July 31–August 3, 1996.

[13] M. Elver, C. J. Banks, P. Jackson, and V. Nagarajan. Verc3: A library for explicit state synthesis of concurrent systems. In *Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition (DATE)*, pages 1381–1386, Dresden, Germany, March 19–23, 2018. DOI: 10.23919/date.2018.8342228

[14] M. Elver and V. Nagarajan. Mcversi: A test generation framework for fast memory consistency verification in simulation. In *IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA)*, pages 618–630, Barcelona, Spain, March 12–16, 2016. DOI: 10.1109/hpca.2016.7446099

[15] S. Hangal, D. Vahia, C. Manovit, J. J. Lu, and S. Narayanan. TSOtool: A program for verifying memory systems using the memory consistency model. In *31st International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)*, pages 114–123, Munich, Germany, June 19–23, 2004. DOI: 10.1109/isca.2004.1310768

[16] M. Herlihy and J. M. Wing. Linearizability: A correctness condition for concurrent objects. *ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems*, 12(3):463–492, 1990. DOI: 10.1145/78969.78972

[17] R. Jhala and K. L. McMillan. Microarchitecture verification by compositional model checking. In *Proc. Computer Aided Verification, 13th International Conference (CAV)*, pages 396–410, Paris, France, July 18–22, 2001. DOI: 10.1007/3-540-44585-4_40

[18] L. Lamport. Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed system. *Communications on ACM*, 21(7):558–565, 1978. DOI: 10.1145/359545.359563

[19] D. Lee and V. Bertacco. MTraceCheck: Validating non-deterministic behavior of memory consistency models in post-silicon validation. In *Proc. of the 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)*, pages 201–213, Toronto, ON, Canada, June 24–28, 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3079856.3080235

[20] D. Lustig, M. Pellauer, and M. Martonosi. PipeCheck: Specifying and verifying microarchitectural enforcement of memory consistency models. In *47th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)*, pages 635–646, Cambridge, UK, December 13–17, 2014. DOI: 10.1109/micro.2014.38

[21] D. Lustig, G. Sethi, M. Martonosi, and A. Bhattacharjee. COATCheck: Verifying memory ordering at the hardware-OS interface. In *Proc. of the 21st International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS)*, pages 233–247, Atlanta, GA, April 2–6, 2016. DOI: 10.1145/2872362.2872399

[22] Y. A. Manerkar, D. Lustig, M. Martonosi, and A. Gupta. PipeProof: Automated memory consistency proofs for microarchitectural specifications. In *51st Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)*, pages 788–801, Fukuoka, Japan, October 20–24, 2018. DOI: 10.1109/micro.2018.00069

[23] Y. A. Manerkar, D. Lustig, M. Martonosi, and M. Pellauer. RTLCheck: Verifying the memory consistency of RTL designs. In *Proc. of the 50th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)*, pages 463–476, Cambridge, MA, October 14–18, 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3123939.3124536

[24] Y. A. Manerkar, D. Lustig, M. Pellauer, and M. Martonosi. CCICheck: Using hb graphs to verify the coherence-consistency interface. In *Proc. of the 48th International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)*, pages 26–37, Waikiki, HI, December 5–9, 2015. DOI: 10.1145/2830772.2830782

[25] A. Meixner and D. J. Sorin. Dynamic verification of sequential consistency. In *32st International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)*, pages 26–37, Madison, WI, June 4–8, 2005. DOI: 10.1109/isca.2005.25

[26] A. Meixner and D. J. Sorin. Dynamic verification of memory consistency in cache-coherent multithreaded computer architectures. In *Proc. International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN)*, pages 73–82, Philadelphia, PA, June 25–28, 2006. DOI: 10.1109/dsn.2006.29

[27] R. Milner. An algebraic definition of simulation between programs. In *Proc. of the 2nd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence*, pages 481–489, London, UK, September 1–3, 1971.

[28] N. Oswald, V. Nagarajan, and D. J. Sorin. ProtoGen: Automatically generating directory cache coherence protocols from atomic specifications. In *45th ACM/IEEE Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)*, pages 247–260, Los Angeles, CA, June 1–6, 2018. DOI: 10.1109/isca.2018.00030

[29] S. Park and D. L. Dill. Verification of FLASH cache coherence protocol by aggregation of distributed transactions. In *SPAA*, pages 288–296, 1996. DOI: 10.1145/237502.237573

[30] M. Plakal, D. J. Sorin, A. Condon, and M. D. Hill. Lamport clocks: Verifying a directory cache-coherence protocol. In *SPAA*, pages 67–76, 1998. DOI: 10.1145/277651.277672

[31] A. Pnueli. The temporal logic of programs. In *18th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science*, pages 46–57, Providence, Rhode Island, October 31–November 1, 1977. DOI: 10.1109/sfcs.1977.32

[32] F. Pong and M. Dubois. Verification techniques for cache coherence protocols. *ACM Computing Surveys*, 29(1):82–126, 1997. DOI: 10.1145/248621.248624

[33] S. Qadeer. Verifying sequential consistency on shared-memory multiprocessors by model checking. *IEEE Transactions on Parallel Distributions on Systems*, 14(8):730–741, 2003. DOI: 10.1109/tpds.2003.1225053

[34] D. E. Shasha and M. Snir. Efficient and correct execution of parallel programs that share memory. *ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems*, 10(2):282–312, 1988. DOI: 10.1145/42190.42277

[35] C. Trippel, Y. A. Manerkar, D. Lustig, M. Pellauer, and M. Martonosi. TriCheck: Memory model verification at the trisection of software, hardware, and ISA. In *Proc. of the 22nd International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS)*, pages 119–133, Xi’an, China, April 8–12, 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3037697.3037719

[36] A. Udupa, A. Raghavan, J. V. Deshmukh, S. Mador-Haim, M. M. K. Martin, and R. Alur. TRANSIT: Specifying protocols with concolic snippets. In *ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI)*, pages 287–296, Seattle, WA, June 16–19, 2013. DOI: 10.1145/2491956.2462174

[37] M. Zhang, J. D. Bingham, J. Erickson, and D. J. Sorin. PVCoherence: Designing flat coherence protocols for scalable verification. In *20th IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA)*, pages 392–403, Orlando, FL, February 15–19, 2014. DOI: 10.1109/mm.2015.48

[38] M. Zhang, A. R. Lebeck, and D. J. Sorin. Fractal coherence: Scalably verifiable cache coherence. In *43rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)*, pages 471–482, Atlanta, GA, December 4–8, 2010. DOI: 10.1109/micro.2010.11
